{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1 \deff0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f16\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604030504040204}Verdana;}
{\f17\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f18\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f20\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f21\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}
{\f22\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f113\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Verdana CE;}{\f114\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Verdana Cyr;}{\f116\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Verdana Greek;}{\f117\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Verdana Tur;}
{\f118\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Verdana Baltic;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;
\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar\adjustright \fs20\cgrid \snext0 Normal;}{\*
\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}{\s15\qc\widctlpar\adjustright \cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext15 Title;}{\s16\li360\ri360\sb100\sa100\widctlpar\adjustright \sbasedon0 \snext16 Blockquote;}{\*\cs17 \additive \ul\cf2 \sbasedon10 Hyperlink;}{
\s18\fi720\widctlpar\adjustright \cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext18 Body Text 2;}{\s19\widctlpar\adjustright \b\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext19 Body Text;}{\s20\ri-720\widctlpar\adjustright \fs20\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext20 Body Text 2;}{\s21\widctlpar\adjustright 
\fs20\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext21 footnote text;}{\*\cs22 \additive \super \sbasedon10 footnote reference;}}{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid-334200614\listsimple{\listlevel\levelnfc23\leveljc0\levelfollow0\levelstartat0\levelspace0\levelindent0{\leveltext
\'01-;}{\levelnumbers;}\fbias0 \fi-360\li360\jclisttab\tx360 }{\listname ;}\listid408498922}}{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid408498922\listoverridecount0\ls1}}{\info{\title Time Types and Table Manners}{\author marc bohlen}{\operator saintandre}
{\creatim\yr2004\mo8\dy17\hr10\min13}{\revtim\yr2004\mo8\dy17\hr10\min13}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords1123}{\nofchars6404}{\*\company Dell Computer Corporation}{\nofcharsws7864}{\vern113}}\margr1620 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\formshade\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot \fet0\sectd \linex0\endnhere\sectdefaultcl {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}
{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain 
\s15\qc\widctlpar\adjustright \cgrid {Time Types and Table Manners
\par 
\par }{\i 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\qj\ri-720\widctlpar\adjustright \cgrid {
\par }\pard\plain \s20\ri-720\widctlpar\adjustright \fs20\cgrid {\fs24 
\par }\pard \s20\qj\fi720\ri-720\widctlpar\adjustright {\fs24 This article will discuss, using the collaborative project Dinner Table}{\cs22\fs24\super \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \s21\widctlpar\adjustright \fs20\cgrid {\cs22\super \chftn }{
 DinnerTable is the result of a collaborative effort between Michael Mateas and myself. A first work in progress report was presented at the Digital Secrets Symposium at Arizona State University in November 2000.}}}{\fs24 
 as a guideline, notions of time, information manipulation and social entanglement in electronic art.
\par Dinner Table is an interactive experience machine
 that mimics a game of life and creates scenarios for a cast of characters in an anonymous urban setting. It is a table, a machine and a game simultaneously. DinnerTable lives in a restaurant setting and feeds in this intimate interface between the privat
e
 and public on external stimuli collected through speech recognition and a vision system. Visual and audio inputs are used to direct the paths of a narrative engine that spins off narrative tracks, enacted on the game board by game board figures and made 
understandable to users in text, motion and imagery. 
\par There are three paths along which this work integrates itself into a user's experience. These paths are }{\i\fs24 Situation, Duration }{\fs24 and}{\i\fs24  Participation}{\fs24 .
\par }\pard \s20\qj\ri-720\widctlpar\adjustright {\fs24\ul 
\par }\pard \s20\qj\fi720\ri-720\widctlpar\adjustright {\i\fs24 Situation}{\fs24 . In its final version DinnerTable 
will be placed in the highly coded social setting of the restaurant. It thus attaches itself to the framework of the restaurant experience and works as an event specific installation. The restaurant is a strongly typed social environment with known etique
tte. The dining tradition is a well-defined ritual in the Western world. It is delicately variable in its details yet rigid in the sequence of events. Quests expect to be served and are often happy to accept recommendations from the Ma\'ee
tre de service.  Dini
ng adheres to formalized protocols, table manners and lack thereof are an integral part of the dining experience. DinnerTable functions as a commentator on unfolding events, a generator of stories and a passive onlooker. It is an uninvited quest but adher
es to the codes of discreteness and exchange. It entangles itself into the dinner event and becomes oddly inspiring or obnoxiously intrusive.
\par }\pard \s20\qj\ri-720\widctlpar\adjustright {\fs24\ul 
\par }\pard \s20\qj\fi720\ri-720\widctlpar\adjustright {\i\fs24 Duration}{\fs24 . Just as information can be efficiently encoded in dedicated data types, time can be more appropriately
 described in select time types. The rational for addressing this issue here is given by the fact that DinnerTable actively employs multiple notions of time to engage the users or to unobtrusively fall into quiet background mode. The idea of distinguishin
g typologies of time is not new. Bergson, for one, emphasized a duality of time. Starting from the Bergsonian notion of a distinction between quantitative discrete time and qualitative time-duration}{\cs22\fs24\super \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain 
\s21\widctlpar\adjustright \fs20\cgrid {\cs22\super \chftn }{ Henri Bergson, }{\i Evolution Cr\'e9atrice}{, 1907,  and }{\i Essai Sur Les Donn\'e9es Imm\'e9diates De La Conscience}{, 1889
\par }}}{\fs24  I add a third vector, that of machinic time. The resulting categories are as follows.
\par }{\i\fs24 Oscillatory Time}{\fs24 : This is discrete time in its purest form. It is the first principle of the quantitative time concept. It is embodied in but not equivalent to the periodic swing of the crystal quartz and atomic clocks}{\cs22\fs24\super 
\chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \fs20\cgrid {\cs22\super \chftn }{ Quantum theory postulates that atoms can only exist in certain discrete 
energy states depending on which orbits about their nuclei are occupied by electrons. Atomic-beam clocks utilize discrete transitions in the electron energy levels of the lowest set of orbits.  For example, a cesium-beam atomic clock is a device that uses
 
as a reference the exact frequency emitted by atoms of the metallic element cesium, in particular its isotope Cs-133 when exposed to microwaves. The frequency produced is a function of the energy absorbed from the incident photons when they excite the out
ermost electron to transition from a lower to a higher orbit. The integral of frequency is time, so this frequency, 9,192,631,770 hertz (Hz = cycles/second), provides the fundamental unit of oscillatory event space. 
\par See }{\field\flddirty{\*\fldinst {HYPERLINK "http://www.nist.gov"}{{\*\datafield 00d0c9ea79f9bace118c8200aa004ba90b0200000003000000e0c9ea79f9bace118c8200aa004ba90b2a00000068007400740070003a002f002f007700770077002e006e006900730074002e0067006f0076002f000000
}}}{\fldrslt {\cs17\cf1 National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)}}}{, The Time and Frequency Division,}{\f16  }{http://www.boulder.nist.gov/timefreq/general/precision.htm
\par }}}{\fs24 . It is the notion of time that has enabled continued increases in processor speeds for computation devices in the last decades. Oscillatory time is cut and dry, arbitrarily fast}{\cs22\fs24\super \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain 
\s21\widctlpar\adjustright \fs20\cgrid {\cs22\super \chftn }{ The present state-of \endash the-art in consumer fare desktop computers contain processors running at 1.5Ghz. Inte
l claims that the doubling of processor speeds every 18 to 24 months (Moore's Law) will continue to hold and result in clock rates exceeding 10Ghz within a decade.
\par See IEDM, 2000 International Electron Devices Meeting
\par http://www.his.com/~iedm}}}{\fs24  and invariant in its repeatable precision. It is always maximum fast and is active (today) in realms beyond those of human perception.
\par }{\i\fs24 Machinic Time}{\fs24 : This time type is derived from oscillatory time but expands the first category into concrete applications. Machinic time is the task-based time of machinic execution. This can be as fundamen
tal as the transistor's move from a high to a low output. Machinic time shows itself in the switching of a relay, the updating of a CRT screen or the meshing of gears in a gear train. This is the time type of loading variables into memory and of algorithm
 
execution.  Machinic time spans a large range, from microseconds to seconds into the timeframe perceivable by human beings. It takes the guise of the electrical, electro-mechanical and purely mechanical. It is variable and open to design preferences. Mach
i
nic time is the time type scientists and engineers use to optimize a task. Furthermore, machinic time is accessible to the electronic arts. Artists work in the machinic time domain when they build a sensor that reacts to the touch of the user, when they c
h
ose to dissolve an image before loading a next one, when they design motors to move almost imperceptibly slow, or when they add delays to an algorithm to ensure a particular behavior of a machine does not evade a user's attention. Inversely, machinic time
 
is employed when an algorithm is optimized to prevent its (graphic) output from appearing awkwardly delayed. Machinic time is an essential element in the toolbox of today's electronic artists. Machinic time is the interface to the intangible domain of the
 third time vector.
\par }{\i\fs24 Perceptual Time}{\fs24 : This is the time domain Bergson}{\cs22\fs24\super \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \s21\widctlpar\adjustright \fs20\cgrid {\cs22\super \chftn }{ For a more 
detailed appreciation of Bergon's ideas and their relevance to critical theory see:
\par Gilles Deleuze, Le Bergsonisme, Presses Universitaires de France, 1966.}}}{\fs24 
 coined qualitative time. Perceptual time is both a function of the possibilities and limitations of our sensory organs as well as an intangible notion of multiplicity of conscious states.
 As such it is the antithesis of oscillatory time. It is a prolongation of the past into the future. It is duration. It is, as a time type, an intuitive measure and defies quantitative description. In sleep we live, by Bergson, pure duration. Through the 
i
dea of duration, perceptual time includes the notion of impatience. While it is culturally encoded perceptual time is a time type all human beings experience. It is the time domain in which human beings can return to an irrational state. It is the time ty
p
e in which a work of art is appreciated. It includes the dwelling and delay necessary to appreciate complexity or the mind space of another human being. Perceptual time can not be manufactured as machinic time can. However, it can be enabled. Hakim Bey's 
idea of T.A.Z., a temporary autonomous zone}{\cs22\fs24\super \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \s21\widctlpar\adjustright \fs20\cgrid {\cs22\super \chftn }{ Hakim Bey, T.A.Z, The Temporary Autonomous Zone Ontological Anarchy and Poetic Terrorism, Autonome
dia, 1985.}}}{\fs24 , can be understood as such a perceptual time enabling circumstance. 
\par Through the intertwining of the narrative track with events occurring around the table, food, drink and more drink, the motion of the figures s
liding across the board and the synchronized display of imagery, DinnerTable plays with the experience of perceptual time.
\par }\pard \s20\qj\ri-720\widctlpar\adjustright {\fs24 
\par }\pard \s20\qj\fi720\ri-720\widctlpar\adjustright {\i\fs24 Participation}{\fs24 . DinnerTable is a knowledge acquisition machine.  It collects audio and visual data from the dinner episode and uses t
his information to situate itself in between its users.  By virtue of its event specificity it can make recourse to the knowledge base on dinner ritual in order to disambiguate collected data. Physically and functionally it meshes into the exchange betwee
n the guests and their activities.  It is both the connecting link as well as a barrier between two dinner companions. 
\par Just as people distinguish between an intrusive stare and an attentive observation, surveillance technologies can manipulatively collect 
or selectively filter data (and discard results). DinnerTable employs traditional surveillance technology in an unorthodox fashion. All collected data is fed back into the experience system in a closed loop form. The closed loop observations are transform
e
d and returned, reflected back to the user in the form of narratives spun by the table over the course of an evening spent with the machine. There is a cold form of intimacy that can evolve from this type of exchange. It is akin to the emotionally distant
 but attentively listening sympathetic stranger. 
\par The present states of speech recognition and image analysis limit the sophistication of the knowledge that can be collected by our machinic table.  It is conceivable that the future will allow us to create a
rtworks that can fully and kindly participate in sophisticated forms of social exchange. The result could be called }{\i\fs24 knowledge-based intimacy}{\fs24 
. DinnerTable is, in this regard, an anticipation of things to come. While the idea of knowledge-based intimacy generates anxiety in many people today, appreciation thereof may become an acquired taste in the future.
\par }\pard \s20\qj\ri-720\widctlpar\adjustright {\fs24 
\par }\pard\plain \s16\qj\li360\ri360\sb100\sa100\widctlpar\adjustright {\f16\fs20 
\par 
\par }}